# NICAR 2026: Using immigration data to tell stories in your community
Friday, March 6, 9-10 a.m.

Julia Ingram and Joe Yerardi

## Overview

As record numbers of immigrants are being arrested and detained under the second Trump administration, those with active immigration cases are also seeing dramatically shifting outcomes. But data on immigration cases, released monthly by the [Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR)](https://www.justice.gov/eoir/foia-library-0) as a massive relational database, can be hard to parse. The Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC) has a few [useful tools](https://tracreports.org/immigration/tools) based on this data that make tracking immigration cases easier. 

Case data is broken down by the city of the immigration court, which means you can zoom in to see what's happening in your city or state, and then compare it to what's happening across the country.

TRAC displays its data in tools that are easy to use for extracting quick statistics. But it lacks an easy download button for more in-depth analysis on the underlying data. We'll show you how to take advantage of an undocumented API on TRAC's website to extract the data. Then, we'll walk you through a few different analysis questions.

This session will be modeled after Joe's Philadelphia Inquirer story ["Philadelphia’s immigration court now rejects three in four asylum cases under Trump"](https://archive.is/62i4T) from October 2025. 

## Immigration Court: TRAC Tools

TRAC has several tools for tracking immigration court outcomes. Here's an overview for the ones that will likely be the most useful to reporting on local immigration in 2026:

- [**Proceeding Outcomes**](https://tracreports.org/phptools/immigration/closure/): Each time an immigration judge issues a significant ruling on a case, it is logged in the EOIR data as a proceeding. An individual's case can, and often does, have multiple proceedings. TRAC here allows you to toggle between deprotation cases, also known as removal cases, and all. Removal cases constitute the vast majority of immigration court cases. Immigrants who are in removal proceedings can request asylum, so most asylum cases are included here as well. The available outcomes include:
    - **Removals**: deportations
    - **Vol departure**: voluntary departures, in which an immigrant can request that a judge allow them to return home on their own rather than receieve a deportation order. These individuals still may end up on a deportation flight operated by ICE if they are returning to a country the U.S. frequently deports people to. This allows immigrants to avoid having a deportation on their record, allowing for a lower bar to re-entry. Voluntary departures are far more common among detained immigrants, and are reaching new heights under the current administration. 
    - **Terminations**: This is when an immigration judge dismisses a case. Once a case is terminated, it cannot be reopened by DHS unless a new charging document is filed against the immigrant. This is different from administrative closure, which temporarily takes the case off the docket. 
    - **Relief granted**: The individual was granted asylum or some other form of relief that allows them to stay in the U.S.
    - **Other**: All other outcomes, including administrative closure or transfers to the Board of Immigration Appeals
- [**Court backlog**](https://tracreports.org/phptools/immigration/backlog/): This tool shows cases before immigration courts that have not yet been adjudicated. These can be split by charge type - the portion of the Immigration and Nationality Act the individual is accused of violating - but note that immigrants with prior criminal records are not necesarily charged with criminal violations of immigration law. In other words, those with prior charges or convictions can still a appear in the "immigration" charge type category.
- [**Mapping representation**](https://tracreports.org/phptools/immigration/addressrep/): This 50-state map shows the number of pending cases in each state and how many of the individuals those cases represent have lawyers. Many immigrants represent themselves (pro se), though those individuals historically see less favorable outcomes.
- [**Asylum decisions**](https://tracreports.org/phptools/immigration/asylum/): This tool provides data on completed asylum cases so you can see how denial or grant rates change over time by immigration court. "Other relief granted" means an immigration judge allowed the individual to stay in the U.S. using a mechanism other than asylum. Asylum grant rates have declined under the second Trump administration.
- [**Asylum decisions by judge**](https://tracreports.org/immigration/reports/judgereports/): TRAC periodically releases an analysis of how asylum grant rates differ by judge. Historically, there is a huge range of outcomes, and you can zoom in to your city or state to see how it compares with those in other places. In the past, California judges have had higher grant rates than judges in the southern U.S., for example. 
- [**Bond decisions**](https://tracreports.org/phptools/immigration/bond/): Since the second Trump administration has widely expanded its use of mandatory detention, a record number of people are being detained -- and staying in detention. Bond rates are hitting new lows, as mandatory detention takes the discretionary power away from the judge to release someone. This tool allows you to view whether a bond request was granted, and what the outcome of the case was in instances where bond was granted. 


Across all of these tools, TRAC lets you select a geographic area and drill down on up to two variables, such as custody, legal representation or nationality, which you can select by clicking the down arrow on each column header to expand the dropdown menu.

## Immigration Enforcement Data

While EOIR and TRAC are the main sources for data on immigration cases, data on immigration enforcement actions mostly comes from ICE and from a few secondary sources that analyze or publish ICE data.

- [**The Deportation Data Project**](https://deportationdata.org/data/ice.html) periodically obtains data from ICE via a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit. This data contains anonymized, individual-level data on encounters, arrests, detentions, detainers and removals. The Deportation Data Project also provides several [tools](https://deportationdata.org/tools.html) for exploring their data, which also allows you to download a pre-filtered slice of it. The website contains much documentation and an FAQ, with the caveat that ICE itself did not provide documentation or a data dictionary for the data it released. 

    Localizing enforcement data from the Deportation Data Project depends on which data set you use. It is difficult to determine where arrests took place at a level any more granular than the state level, although some information can be gleaned from the "apprehension site landmark" field. Be careful when using this field, though, as it can sometimes simply refer to the field office or area that has jurisdiction over the ICE agent that made the arrest, rather than denote where an arrest actually took place. It's also tempting to use the Area of Responsibility (AOR), but this should also be interpreted with caution. AORs are administrative jurisdictions that often span multiple states. [See this map.](https://deportationdata.org/data/processed/ice-offices.html)

    Data on detentions and detainers on the other hand, can be directly geolocated to the facility. The Vera Institute of Justice publishes [metadata](https://github.com/vera-institute/ice-detention-trends/blob/main/metadata/facilities.csv) on detention facilities that you can link to this data using the detention_facility_code. 

- [**ICE Detention Management Data**](https://www.ice.gov/detain/detention-management) Approximately every two weeks, ICE publishes updated data on the detention population. The Deportation Data Project stores the [previous releases](https://deportationdata.org/data/reports.html) on their site. Some of this data is nationwide, but one of the spreadsheet tabs contains detention-facility level data for most ICE facilities (excluding temporary hold facilities and a few other types). It's important to note that much of this data, including the average daily detention population, is averaged from the start of the government fiscal year, which begins on Oct. 1. This means that the population figures do not always represent current or recent trends. For more accurate facility-level detention populations, we recommend using [Detention Reports by Relevant Research](https://detentionreports.com/), which uses a different method for estimating average daily population that reflects more recent changes. 

- [**287g data**](https://www.ice.gov/identify-and-arrest/287g) This data from ICE shows which local agencies have active partnerships with ICE. There are a few different types of agreements agencies can have with varying levels of involvement. Some simply allow the partnering agency to execute an ICE warrent when they encounter someone in jail, others (the task force model) grants them some of the authority ICE agents have to make immigration-related arrests. There is no comprehensive dataset available on the number of arrests conducted via 287(g) programs. Although some of the arrests or detentions in the ICE data from the Deportation Data Project will point to 287(g), experts believe this to be unreliable and an undercount. 